Let's start storing data about the user, whether the user is authenticated and so on and for that, I
think it makes sense to start off by creating a user model.
So in the auth folder, I'll add a new user.model.ts file
and the idea here is that this model stores all the core data that makes up a user and even helps
us with validating whether that token is still valid
because remember, I said that the token would expire after one hour and we'll need to therefore also
find out not only if a token exists but if it is still valid
and I want to manage this in this model.
Therefore I export a class here with a name of user, which I guess is a fitting name for a user model
and in there, we can use a constructor so that we can create a user with the new keyword
and there again, I'll use the TypeScript shortcut of automatically storing arguments of the constructor in
properties of the class by adding an accessor in front of the argument
name which will then also be used as the property name
and there, a user should have an e-mail which is of type string.
A user also should have an ID which is of type string and we need that token
and this I will store as a private property, _token which is a string and also a token expiration
date which should be a private property, _tokenExpirationDate which will be a date object,
so of type date.
Now why underscore and why private? Private because the token should not be retrievable like this, instead
when the user or you as a developer want to get access to the token, you should actually be required
to do that in a way that will automatically check the validity and this can be achieved by adding a
getter here with the get keyword which I'll name token now.
Now what is a getter? A getter here looks like a function, we add parentheses and then a function body
but you actually access it like a property, so you will be able to do something like user.token.
This is how you will be able to access this because it's a getter, it's a special type of property
you could say, it's a property where you can write code that runs when you try to access this property,
so it's property plus plus you could say. A getter also means that the user can't overwrite this,
so setting user token to something new, this will throw an error because it's only a getter not a setter.
There are setters too but we don't need them here,
you set a token and you create a new user object and we will always create a new user object when a
user logs in. So therefore we have that getter named token
and the idea here is that we of course return this _token here but before we do that, we can
add certain checks or to be precise,
I want to add one check,
I want to check if this token expiration date does not exist,
so if this does not exist or if the current date which we get with new date, that's a Javascript feature,
that's the current timestamp, not just a date but also the current time, if the current timestamp is greater
than this token expiration date,
so if it does exist but it is smaller than the current timestamp, then we know that the token expired,
right?
Because if the token expiration date is smaller than the current date, then it's in the past
and that means even if we have a token, it's not valid anymore and therefore in that case, I will return
null even though we might have a token.
That's the logic I want to add in this user object for now or in that user class for now.
With that created, in the auth service, I want to store the authenticated user and I will actually store
it as a subject.
So for that, let's add a user subject with new subject, the subject here is of course imported from
RxJS and this will be a generic type where we store the user in the subject in the end, so the user
needs to be imported from the user model and now with that, the idea of course is that we emit a new user,
we
next a new user,
whenever we have one we login or also when we logout, when we clear the user, when the user becomes
invalid or the token expired.
So now here, for example for signing up, we know that when we succeed, if we don't have an error, we get
the auth response data which contains that token we need for the user, which contains the e-mail and the
expiry date
and therefore, I want to add a new operator, a new rxjs/operator to that pipe here, to that observable
pipe,
this will be the tap operator. Now the tap operator,
just like catch error, needs to be imported from rxjs/operators
and if you remember, tap was an operator that allows us to perform some action without changing the response.
So it steps into that observable chain but it doesn't stop it, block it or change it, it just run some
code with the data you get back from the observable, so with the response in this case. Therefore here
we get our response data
and here, I then want to create my new user. For that I'll create a new constant, user, where I call new
user, using that user model and we need to forward that e-mail because we expect that as our argument
here in the constructor. We need to forward the ID which is the resData local ID, that's the generated
user ID generated by Firebase. We need to forward the token which is our ID token and we need the
expiration date which should be a date object.
Now that's not part of our response,
that is something we have to generate
and for that I'll add a new constant here, expiration date, where I create a new Javascript date object
based on that expiresIn time we get back from Firebase. Now expires in, if you check the Firebase docs
here, is a string but in the end, it holds a number, the number of seconds until the ID token expires.
So therefore here, all we have to do is we have to get the current date
and on that, we can call get time,
that's the current timestamp in milliseconds since the beginning of time, which in Javascript was in
1970.
So we have the current timestamp in milliseconds
and to that, we add resData expires in, which we have to convert to a number by adding extra plus in
front of it.
So we add resData expires in times 1000 because expires in, that is in seconds,
this is the timestamp in milliseconds, here therefore we need to multiply the seconds with 1000 to convert
this to milliseconds as well
and this gives us the expiration date in milliseconds
and by wrapping this with new date as I'm doing it, this will convert it back to a date object which
is a concrete timestamp in a date object form and not in milliseconds anymore.
So this is the expiration date which we now can pass as a fourth argument here to that user constructor,
here it is.
So this constructs the user with the data we get back from the back-end and with our expiration date,
now we can use the subject to next
that user, so to set this or emit this as our now currently logged in user in this application. Now just as
before with the error handling,
we need to exact same logic for logging users in and therefore we can use the same approach as for the
error handling.
I'll add a new private method, handle authentication or whatever you want to name it
and there, I expect to get the e-mail, I expect to get the token, I expect to get expires in let's say as
a number and now we can grab that code we just wrote here in tap and move that here into handle authentication.
Now use expires in which it's not coming from response data and which does not have to be converted
to a number because we already expect it as a number, use the e-mail here,
we also need the user ID so let's expect that as a string as well, so use the user ID here and also
use the token here.
Now we have handle authentication, that would do everything we need related to authentication, here in
tap when we get the response data, we now just have to call this handle authentication and forward resData
e-mail,
resData local ID, resData expires in as a number, so let's add a plus in front of that
and before we add this, we also need res
data token, ID token excuse me.
So we basically call handle authentication with all the data this function needs
and now we can just copy that tap
operator here and move it into the pipe for our login route, so that there, we now also call this
handle authentication, we forward all that data and in here, in handle authentication, we then use that
data to create a new user and log the user in.
Now that's creating the user, that's logging us in, the next step of course will be to also redirect
user in the user interface and navigate us away and also to then update the UI
and for example, show a logout button in our header and only show the managed buttons here if we are
logged in.
So update the entire header based on the auth status
and as I just said, forward us when we do login.